Software is more than just a program code. A program is an executable code, which serves
some computational purpose. Software is considered to be a collection of executable
programming code, associated libraries and documentations. Software, when made for a
specific requirement is called software product.we can define software engineering as an engineering branch associated with the
development of software product using well-defined scientific principles, methods and
procedures. The outcome of software engineering is an efficient and reliable software product.Without using software engineering principles it would be difficult to develop large programs. In
industry it is usually needed to develop large programs to accommodate multiple functions. A
problem with developing such large commercial programs is that the complexity and difficulty
levels of the programs increase exponentially with their sizes. Software engineering helps to
reduce this programming complexity. Software engineering principles use two important
techniques to reduce problem complexity: abstraction and decomposition. The principle of
abstraction implies that a problem can be simplified by omitting irrelevant details. In other
words, the main purpose of abstraction is to consider only those aspects of the problem that are
relevant for certain purpose and suppress other aspects that are not relevant for the given
purpose. Once the simpler problem is solved, then the omitted details can be taken into
consideration to solve the next lower level abstraction, and so on. Abstraction is a powerful way
of reducing the complexity of the problem. The other approach to tackle problem complexity is 
decomposition. In this technique, a complex problem is divided into several smaller problems
and then the smaller problems are solved one by one. However, in this technique any random
decomposition of a problem into smaller parts will not help. The problem has to be decomposed
such that each component of the decomposed problem can be solved independently and then the
solution of the different components can be combined to get the full solution. A good
decomposition of a problem should minimize interactions among various components. If the
different subcomponents are interrelated, then the different components cannot be solved
separately and the desired reduction in complexity will not be realized.
The need of software engineering arises because of higher rate of change in user requirements
and environment on which the software is working.
It is easier to build a wall than to a house or building, likewise, as the
size of software become large engineering has to step to give it a scientific process.
If the software process were not based on scientific and engineering
concepts, it would be easier to re-create new software than to scale an existing one.
As hardware industry has shown its skills and huge manufacturing has lower down
the price of computer and electronic hardware. But the cost of software remains high if
proper process is not adapted.
The always growing and adapting nature of software hugely depends
upon the environment in which the user works. If the nature of software is always
changing, new enhancements need to be done in the existing one. This is where software
engineering plays a good role.
Better process of software development provides better and
quality software product.